I know you're thinking why is that guy
get to sit down that's because this is
radio I tell radio stories about design
and I report on all kinds of stories
buildings and toothbrushes mascots
wayfinding and fonts my mission is to
get people to engage with the design
that they care about so they began to
pay attention to all forms of design
when you decode the world with design
intent in mind the world becomes kind of
magical instead of seeing the broken
things you see all the little bits of
genius that anonymous designers have
sweated over to make our lives better
and that's essentially the definition of
design making life better and providing
joy and few things give me greater joy
than a well-designed flag yeah
happy fiftieth anniversary on your flag
Canada it is beautiful gold standard
love it I'm kind of obsessed with Flags
sometimes everything obstructive flags
and people are like I don't I don't care
about flags and and then we start
talking about flags and trust me
100% of people care about flags there's
just something about them that works on
our emotions my family wrapped my
Christmas presents as Flags this year
and including the blue gift bag that's
dressed up as the as the flag of
Scotland I put this picture online and
and sure enough within the first few
minutes someone left a comment that said
you can take that Scottish Saltire and
shove it up your ass
wait see people are passionate about
flags you know that's the way it is what
I love about flags is that once you
understand the design of flags what
makes a good flag what makes a bad flag
you can understand the design of almost
anything so what I'm gonna do here is
I'm gonna kind of cracked open an
episode of my radio show 99% invisible
and I'm gonna reconstruct it here on
stage so when I when I
press a button over here as for sound
it's gonna make a sound so whenever you
hear a sound or a voice or a piece of
music it's because I pressed a button
alright got it
here we go three two this is 99%
invisible I'm Roman Mars the five basic
principles of flag design according to
the north american vexillological
association that's a little logical
vexillology is the study of flags it's
that extra law that makes it sound weird
keep it simple
the flag should be so simple that a
child can draw it from memory before I
moved to Chicago in 2005 I didn't even
know his cities have their own flags
most larger cities do have flex well I
didn't know that that's Ted Kay by the
way hello it's a flag expert it's a
totally awesome guy I'm Ted Kay I have
edited a scholarly journal on flag
studies and I'm currently involved with
the Portland flag Association and the
north american vexillological
association Ted literally wrote the book
on flag design it's more of a pamphlet
really it's about 16 pages
yes it's called good flag bad flag how
to design a great flag and that first
city flag I discovered in Chicago is a
beaut Whitefield
two horizontal blue stripes and four
six-pointed red stars down the middle
number two use meaningful symbolism the
blue stripes represent the water in the
river and the lake
the flags images colors or patterns
should relate to what it symbolizes the
red stars represent significant events
in Chicago's history namely the founding
of Fort Dearborn on the future side of
Chicago the Great Chicago Fire the world
Columbian Exposition which everyone
remembers because of the White City and
the Century of Progress exposition which
no one remembers at all number three use
two to three basic colors the basic rule
for colors is to use two to three colors
from the standard color set red white
blue
yellow-and-black the design of the
Chicago flag has complete buy-in with an
entire cross-section of the city
it is everywhere every Municipal
Building flies the flag like there's
probably at least one star in every
block near where I work that sells some
sort of Chicago flag paraphernalia
that's what Moser from Chicago magazine
today just for example I went to get a
haircut and when I sat down in the
barber's chair there was a Chicago flag
on the box that the barber is kept all
those tools in and then in the mirror
there was a Chicago flag on the wall
behind me what I left the guy passed me
who had a Chicago flag badge on his
backpack it's adaptable and remixable
the six pointed stars in particular show
up in all kinds of places the coffee I
bought the other day had a have a star
on it it's a distinct symbol of Chicago
pride when a police officer or a
firefighter dies in Chicago often it's
not the flag of the United States on his
casket it can be the flag of the city of
Chicago that's how deeply the flag has
gotten into the Civic imagery of Chicago
and it isn't just that people love
Chicago and therefore love the flag I
also think that people love Chicago more
because the flag is so cool a positive
feedback loop there between great
symbolism and civic pride okay so when I
moved back to San Francisco in 2008 I
researched its flag because I had never
seen it in the previous eight years I
lived there and I found it I am sorry to
say sadly lacking
I know it hurts me too
well let me start from the top number
one keep it simple keeping it simple the
flag should be so simple that a child
can draw it from memory it's a
relatively complex flag ok here we go ok
the main component of the San Francisco
flag is a Phoenix representing the city
rising from the ashes after the
devastating fires of the 1850s a
powerful symbol for San Francisco I
still don't really dig the Phoenix
design-wise it manages to both be too
crude and have too many details at the
same time which if you were trying for
that you wouldn't be able to do it and
it just looks bad at a distance but
having deep meaning puts that element in
the plus column behind the Phoenix the
background is mostly white and then it
has a substantial gold border around it
which is a very attractive design
element I think is okay but here come
the big no nose of flag design number
four no lettering or seals never use
writing of any kind underneath the
Phoenix there's a motto on a ribbon that
translates to gold in peace iron and war
Plus and this is the big problem
it says San Francisco across the bottom
if you need to write the name of what
you're representing on your flag your
symbolism has failed the United States
flag doesn't say like USA across the
front
in fact country flags you know they tend
to behave like hats off to South Africa
and Turkey and Israel and Somalia and
Japan and Gambia there's a bunch of
really great country flags but they
obeyed good design principles because
the stakes are high they're on the
international stage but city state and
regional flags are another story
there is a scourge of bad flags and they
must be stopped that is the truth and
that is the Dare their first step is to
recognize that we have a problem
a lot of people tend to think that good
design is just a matter of taste and you
know and quite honestly sometimes it is
actually but sometimes it isn't alright
here's the full list of NAV apply design
principles the five basic principles of
flag design number one keep it simple
keep it simple
number two use meaningful symbolism
number three use two to three basic
colors number four no lettering or seals
never use writing of any kind because
you can't read that at a distance number
five and be distinctive all the best
flags tends to stick to these principles
and like I've been said before like most
country flags are okay but here's the
thing if you showed this list of
principles to any designer of almost
anything they would say these principles
simplicity deep meaning having few
colors or being thoughtful about colors
uniqueness don't have writing you can't
read all those principles apply to them
too but sadly good design principles are
rarely invoked in US city flags
our biggest problem seems to be that
fourth one we just can't stop herself
from putting our names on our flags or
like little municipal seals with tiny
writing on them here's the thing about
municipal seals they were designed to be
on pieces of paper where you can read
them not on flags 100 feet away flapping
in the breeze so here's a bunch of flags
again
vexillology is call these sob seals on a
bedsheet and if you can't tell what city
they go to yeah that's that's exactly
the problem it's ever Anaheim apparently
they've they fixed it
these flags are everywhere in the US the
European equivalent of the municipal
seal is the is a city coat of arms and
this is where we can learn a lesson for
how to do things right so this is the
city coat of arms of Amsterdam now if
this were a United States City the flag
would probably look like this you know
but instead the flag of Amsterdam looks
like this rather than plopping the whole
coat of arms on a solid background and
writing an Amsterdam below it they just
take the key elements of the askew chin
the shield and they turn it into the
most badass city flag in the world and
and because it's so badass those flags
and crosses are found throughout
Amsterdam just just like Chicago are
used even though a seal and a bedsheet
flags are particularly painful and
offensive to me nothing can quite
prepare you for when the biggest train
wrecks in vexillological history are you
ready it's the flag the Milwaukee
Wisconsin
[Applause]
I mean it's it's distinctive I'll give
him that
it was adopted in 1955 the city ran a
contest and gathered a bunch of
submissions with all kinds of designs
and an alderman by the name of Fred
Steffen cobbled together parts of the
submissions to make what is now the
Milwaukee flag it's a kitchen sink flag
there's a gigantic gear representing
industry there's a ship recognizing the
port a giant stalk of wheat paying
homage to the brewing industry it's a
hot mess
and Steve kotas a graphic designer from
Milwaukee wants to change it it's really
awful it's a misstep on the city's
behalf to say the least but what puts
the Milwaukee flag over the top almost
at the point of self parity is on it is
a picture of the Civil War battle flag
of the Milwaukee regiment so that's the
final element in it that just makes it
that much more sort of ridiculous that
there is you know a flag design within
go ahead of mine yeah he's playing yeah
ya know Milwaukee is a fantastic city
I've been there I love it the most
depressing part of this flag though is
that there have been two major redesign
contests the last one was held in 2001
105 entries were received but in the end
the members of the Milwaukee Arts Board
decided that none of the new entries
were worthy of flying over the city they
couldn't agree to change that thing
that's discouraging enough to make you
think that good design and democracy
just simply do not go together
but Steve CODIS is gonna try one more
time to redesign the Milwaukee flag
I believe Milwaukee's a great city every
great city deserves a great flag Steve
isn't ready to reveal his design yet one
things about proposing one of these
things is you have to like get people on
board and then you reveal your design
but here's the trick if you want to
design a great flag a kick-ass flag like
Chicago's or DC's which also has a great
flag start by drawing it one by one and
a half inch rectangle on a piece of
paper your design has to fit within that
tiny rectangle here's why three by five
foot flag on a pole 100 feet away looks
about the same size as a 1 by 1 and a
half inch rectangle seen about 15 inches
from your eye you'll be surprised at how
compelling and simple the design can be
when you hold yourself to that
limitation meanwhile back in San
Francisco is there anything we can do I
like to say that in every bad flag
there's a good flag trying to get out
the way to make San Francisco's flag a
good flag is to take the motto off
because you can't read that at a
distance take the name off and the
border might even be made thicker so
it's more a part of the flag and I would
simply take the Phoenix and make it a
great big element in the middle of the
flag with the current Phoenix that's got
to go
I would simplify or stylize the Phoenix
depict a big wide winged bird coming out
of flames emphasize those flames so this
San Francisco flag was designed by Frank
Camaro based on Ted Kay suggestions I
don't know what he would do if he was
completely unfettered and didn't hat
didn't follow those guidelines fans of
my radio show and podcast they've heard
me complain about bad flags they've sent
me other suggested designs this one's by
Neal Musset both are so much better and
I think if they were adopted I would see
them around the city in my crusade to
make flags of the world more beautiful
many listeners have taken it upon
themselves to redesign their flags and
look into the feasibility of getting
them officially adopted
if you see your city flag and like it
fly it even if it violates a design rule
or two I don't care but if you don't see
your city flag maybe it doesn't exist
but maybe it does and it just sucks and
I dare you to join the effort to try to
change that as we move more and more
into cities the city flag will become
not just a symbol of that city as a
place but also it could become a symbol
of how that city considers design itself
especially today as the populace is
becoming more design aware and I think
design awareness is at an all-time high
a well-designed flag could be seen as an
indicator of how a city considers all of
its design systems its public transit
its parks its signage it might seem
frivolous but it's not often when city
leaders say we have more important
things to do than worry about a city
flag my response is if you had a great
city flag you would have a banner for
people to rally under to face those more
important things I've seen firsthand
what a good city flag can do in the case
of Chicago the marriage of good design
and civic pride is something that we
need in all places the best part about
municipal flags is that we own them they
are an open source publicly owned design
language of the community when they are
done well they are remixable adaptable
and they're powerful we could control
the branding and graphical imagery of
our cities with a good flag but instead
by having bad flags we don't use we cede
that territory to sports teams and
chambers of commerce and tourism Ward's
sports teams can leave and break our
hearts inside some of us know don't
really care about Sports and Tourism
campaigns can just be cheesy but a great
city flag is something that represents a
city to its people and its people it's
the world at large and when that flag is
a beautiful thing that connection is a
beautiful thing so maybe all the sea
flags can be as inspiring as Hong Kong
or Portland OR Trondheim and we can do
away with all the bad flags like San
Francisco Milwaukee Cedar Rapids and
finally when we're all done we can do
something about Pocatello Idaho
considered by the north american
vexillological association as the worst
city flag in North America
yeah that thing has a trademark symbol
on it people that hurts me just to look
at thank you so much for listening
[Applause]